# An important difference between conservative and liberal movements

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**NOTE: this text was not written by me and is from user
[u/Iamtheonewhobawks](https://www.reddit.com/user/Iamtheonewhobawks){:target="_blank"
rel="noopener"}. The only changes were minor formatting for
readability.  I would merely link to reddit if they had a way to
highlight comments, but they do not.**

The
[original](https://www.reddit.com/r/bestof/comments/vmnrba/ugodemperornixon_describes_how_the_republican/ie2p1wf/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"} post.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There's  an intrinsic  advantage that  conservative movements  have in
regards to messaging and campaigning:  they do not need to demonstrate
effectiveness. One of the main  defining principles of conservatism is
that  there cannot  be  improvements beyond  the  current or  previous
social  order. Problems  that still  exist and  cannot be  ignored are
considered  unsolvable  inevitabilities,  as  inescapable  as  entropy
itself.

Progressive movements, by contrast, have the opposite main defining
principle; however things are or were, there is always something that
can be improved. Problems that still exist and cannot be ignored are
considered an intolerable oversight, in need of immediate attention.

This means, among other things, that conservatives don't have to make
an argument. They've got nothing to propose or explain, simply because
the entire platform is whatever they're already most familiar
with. They need only cast doubt and sow fear, easy tasks in the face
of new and unfamiliar ideas. An effective conservative propagandist
doesn't need and is in fact hampered by any depth of knowledge about
any issue, since the message must always be a reassurance that there
is nothing new to understand. All information and argument that
doesn't reinforce the established structure is rejected. The
established structure is best defended tautologically without nuance
or logical consistency.

Luckily, it's pretty easy to point out that there has never once, in
thousands of years, in all its millions of permutations, been a
conservative movement that was proven right. Progressives should
probably keep that front and center when engaging with conservative
opposition.
