# Why Trump makes so many mistakes

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**NOTE: the text was not written by me and is from reddit user
[NowGoodbyeForever](https://www.reddit.com/user/NowGoodbyeForever){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}.
The only changes were minor formatting for
readability.  I would merely link to reddit if they had a way to
highlight comments, but they do not.**

The
[original](https://www.reddit.com/r/canada/comments/1j8udpt/trump_threatens_ontario_will_pay_a_financial/mh87126/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"} post.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

I've had the unique opportunity to spend time with many CEOs,
executives, and other high-powered rich people in positions of power
like Trump. And this tracks with what I've seen, time and time again:
People who operate on a perpetual system of **"If I needed to
understand this to succeed, I would have learned it by now."** But
depending on how early in their lives they hit this level of success,
they might not have learned anything new for *decades*.

Donald Trump does not know or understand how the world works, in a
literal way. Go back through all of his public comments and see how
often he says shit like "Nobody knew this" or "People don't know about
this" when referring to *incredibly common knowledge* like how
vaccines work, or what hurricanes are. What he's actually revealing is
that **he just learned these facts, and assumes no one knew them
before he did.**

So what's happening here, and what's been happening for months, is
that Trump is slowly understanding how modern society works. Countries
negotiate and compromise to share goods, resources, and services while
also protecting their interests whenever possible. This is incredibly
basic shit that's obvious to anyone who has ever paid attention in
school, listened to a history podcast, or played a game like *Settlers
of Catan* or *Civilization*.

But because Trump is, again, *incredibly fucking stupid* and his
entire worldview is shaped by the "Heads I Win, Tails You Lose"
mentality that his family brought to real estate for generations, he
sees every positive for Canada as a negative for America. Look at him
whining: He cannot understand why we're not just giving him the thing
he wants for free, because **his life has been taking what he wants
for free and being rewarded for it.**

I've also worked in child care. And sometimes when you have to tell a
kid "No," they melt down in a big way. They freak out like they've
been hit, like they're being boiled alive. They have zero tools to
cope with a situation where they can't immediately or eventually get
what they want, and it *breaks their world*. This is important, and
necessary, and a vital part of growing up.

**It's a shame we all have to suffer as this elderly grandfather with
access to nukes learns about this for the first time.**
